Add support for compilation time checked expressions in annotations (#7897)
micronaut-projects/micronaut-core: src/main/docs/guide/config/evaluatedExpressions.adoc

Since 4.0 Micronaut supports embedding evaluated expressions in annotation values using `#{...}` syntax which
allows to achieve even more flexibility while configuring your application.

.Evaluated Expression example
[source,groovy]
----

> @Value("#{ T(Math).random() }")

Reviewer: Is it a correct example? If would expect `Math` to be with the package name. Maybe you can add the examples to the docs projects.

Author: This is `java.lang.Math` class which does not need to be prefixed by package name, so this one is correct

double injectedValue;
----

> Evaluated expressions can be used wherever annotation value accept string (within array of strings as well).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Expressions can be defined whenever an annotation member accepts a string or an array of strings.
```

.Evaluated Expression in array
[source,java]
----
@Singleton
@Requires(env = {"dev", "#{ 'test' }"})
public class EvaluatedExpressionInArray {}
----

> You can also embed one or more expressions in string template in a way similar to embedding properties with `${...}` syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also embed one or more expressions in a string template in a similar manner to embedding properties with the `${...}` syntax.
```

.Evaluated Expression template
[source,groovy]
----
@Value("http://#{'hostname'}/#{'path'}")
String url;
----

Evaluated Expressions are validated and compiled at build time which guarantees type safety at runtime. Once application
is running expressions are evaluated on demand as part of annotation metadata resolution. The usage of expressions does

> not affect performance as evaluation process is completely reflection free.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Evaluated Expressions are validated and compiled at build time which guarantees type safety at runtime. 

Once an application is running expressions are evaluated on demand as part of annotation metadata resolution. The usage of expressions does not impact performance as evaluation process is completely reflection free.

Note that, for security reasons expressions cannot be dynamically compiled at runtime from potentially untrusted input. All expressions are compiled and checked statically during the compilation process of the application with errors reported as compilation failures.
```

In general, Evaluated Expression can be treated as statement written using a programming language with reduced
set of available features. Even though the complexity of expression is only limited by the list of supported syntax

> constructs, it is in general not recommended to place complex logic inside it as there are usually better ways to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constructs, it is in general not recommended to place complex logic inside an expression as there are usually better ways to
```

achieve the same result.

> == Evaluated Expression language reference

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Evaluated Expression Language Reference
```

The Evaluated Expressions syntax supports the following functionality:

* Literal Values
* Math Operators
* Comparison Operators
* Logical Operators
* Ternary Operator
* Type References
* Method Invocation

> * Property Access

Reviewer 2: Do we support the safe dereference operator for property access? ie. `foo?.bar`

Author: This one was on the list in #8323. Not implemented yet, but I was going to add it later, this one is definetely needed

Integer and Long values can also be specified in hexadecimal or octal notation. Float and Double values can also be
specified in exponential notation. All numeric values can be negative as well.

.Literal values examples
[source]
----
#{ null }
#{ true }
#{ 'string value' }
#{ 10 }
#{ 0xFFL }
#{ 10L }
#{ .123f }
#{ 1E+1d }
#{ 123D }
----

=== Math Operators

The supported mathematical operators are `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `^`. Math operators can only be applied to numeric
values (except `+` which can be used for string concatenation as well). Mathematical operations are performed in order
enforced by standard operator precedence. You can also change evaluation order by using brackets `()`.

`/` and `%` operators can be aliased by `div` and `mod` keywords respectively.

.Math operators examples
[source]
----
#{ 1 + 2 }             // 3
#{ 'a' + 'b' + 'c' }   // 'abc'
#{ 7 - 3 }             // 4
#{ 7 * 3 }             // 21
#{ 7 * ( 3 + 1) }      // 28

#{ 15 / 3 }            // 5
#{ 15 div 3 }          // 5

#{ 15 % 3 }            // 0
#{ 15 mod 3 }          // 0

// Unlike in Java, ^ operator means exponentiation
#{ 3 ^ 2 }             // 9
----

=== Comparison Operators

> The following comparison operators are supported: `==`, `!=`, `>`, `<`, `>=`, `\<=`, `matches`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following comparison operators are supported: `==`, `!=`, `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `matches`
```

Author: <= is treated as special symbol in adoc, so this one needs to be escaped

Comparison operations are performed in order enforced by standard operator precedence.
You can also change evaluation order by using brackets `()`.

Equality check is supported for both primitive types and objects. It is performed using `Object.equals()` method.

> `>`, `<`, `>=`, `\<=` operations can only be applied to numeric types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=` operations can only be applied to numeric types.
```

`matches` keyword can be used to determine whether a string matches provided regular expression which has to
be specified as string literal. The regular expression itself will be checked for validity at compilation time.

.Comparison operators examples
[source]
----
#{ 1 + 2 == 3 }         // true
#{ 'abc' != 'abc' }     // false
#{ 7 > 3 }              // true
#{ 7 < 3 }              // false
#{ 7 >= 7 }             // true
#{ 7 <= 8 }             // false

#{ 'AbC' matches '[A-Za-z*'  }      // Compilation failure
#{ 'AbC' matches '[A-Za-z]*'  }     // true

> #{ 'AbC' matches '[a-z]*'  }        // false

Reviewer 2: what happens with regex escaping? Can we support `/.+/` syntax?

Author: regex escaping works in the same as as for `@Requires(property = ..., pattern = ...)`. So in annotation it looks like this
```
"#{ '123' matches '\\d+' }"
```

`/.+/` syntax can be supported, will add it to the list in #8323

The following logical operators are supported: `&&` (can be aliased with `and`), `||` (can be aliased with `or`),
`!`. Logical operations are performed in order enforced by standard operator precedence.
You can also change evaluation order by using brackets `()`.

.Logical operators examples
[source]
----
#{ true && false }         // false
#{ true and true }         // true

#{ true || false }         // true
#{ false or false }        // false

#{ !false }                // true
#{ !!true }                // true
----

=== Ternary Operator

A standard ternary operator is supported to allow specifying if-then-else conditional logic in expression

[source]
----
condition ? thenBranch : elseBranch
----

where `condition` evaluation should provide boolean value, and the complexity of `then` and `else` branches is not
limited.

.Ternary operator examples
[source]
----
#{ 15 > 10 ? 'a' : 'b' }    // 'a'
#{ 15 >= 16 ? 'a' : 'b' }   // 'b'
----

=== Type References

Predefined syntax construct `T(...)` can be used to reference a class. The value inside brackets should be fully
qualified class name (including package). The only exception is `java.lang.*` classes which can be referenced

> directly by only specifying simple class name. Primitive types can not be specified inside brackets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A predefined syntax construct `T(...)` can be used to reference a class. The value inside brackets should be fully
qualified class name (including the package name). The only exception is `java.lang.*` classes which can be referenced
directly by only specifying the simple class name. Primitive types can not be referenced.
```

Type References are evaluated in different ways depending on the context.

==== Simple type reference

> Simple type reference is resolved as `Class<?>` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A simple type reference is resolved as a `Class<?>` object.
```

.Type reference example
[source]
----
#{ T(java.lang.String) }    // String.class
----

> Same rule applies if type reference is specified as method argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Same rule applies if type reference is specified as a method argument.
```

==== Type check with `instanceof`

> Type Reference can be used as right-hand side part of `instanceof` operator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Type Reference can be used as the right-hand side part of the `instanceof` operator
```

.Type check example
[source]
----
#{ 'abc' instanceof T(String) }  // true
----

> which is equivalent to the following Java code and will be evaluated as boolean value:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is equivalent to the following Java code and will be evaluated as a boolean value:
```

[source]
----
"abc" instanceof String
----

==== Static method invocation

> Type Reference can be used to invoke static method of a class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Type Reference can be used to invoke a static method of a class
```

.Static method invocation
[source]
----
#{ T(Math).random() }
----

=== Expression Evaluation Context

By default, the only methods you can invoke inside Evaluated Expressions are static methods using type references.

To invoke non-static methods, you need to place `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` annotation on a class owning the
method you want to invoke inside expression. In this case the annotated class is registered within evaluation context
which makes its methods and properties available for referencing in evaluated expressions. Any context reference

> needs to be prefixed with `#` sign.

Reviewer 2: Some clarity is needed here. Do these types become global? I thought they were scoped to an annotation:

https://github.com/micronaut-projects/micronaut-core/pull/7897/files#diff-a3f94398f8b5c32c73c28d8d51b0066abed484d136e0a722d44179352e0f2d01R28

If they are global that would be a problem.

If they are not global the documentation needs clarifying here that they are scoped for usage with a paritcular annotation.

Author: @graemerocher 
In current implementation the user can annotate any class with `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` which will allow referencing any method or property of this class within expressions, so they do become global in this sense. Context classes can also be scoped to annotation or annotation member in the following way (forgot to mention this in docs):
```
@EvaluatedExpressionContext(CustomAnnotationLevelContext.class)
@interface CustomAnnotation {

     @EvaluatedExpressionContext(CustomAnnotationMemberContext.class)
     String customValue();
} 
```
which will limit the scope of context to respective annotation or annotation member.

The motivation behind letting users annotate any class with @EvaluatedExpressionContext was to allow something like
```
@ConfigurationProperties("config.path")
@EvaluatedExpressionContext
public class Config {
    @NotBlank
    public String cronSchedule;    
}

public class ScheduledClass {
   
    @Scheduled(cron = "#{ #cronSchedule } 
    public void runOnSchedule() {}
} 
```
another usecase is defining custom bean loading condition for usage in `@Requires`

Thinking more about it I see how that can cause issues in case of name clashes between these global context, especially if they will be defined in separate modules over which the user has no direct control. So maybe we should narrow it in some way, e.g. only allowing referencing context from the same module for classes annotated with `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` (to allow annotating only the classes that the user can modify in-place in case of clashes). And allow external modules enrich context only if annotation (or annotation member) itself has `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` on it.

Overall, the above example with `@ConfigurationProperties` is the key usecase that we would like to cover in our apps, and it seems like we can achieve it in simpler way by allowing direct reference to bean properties in expressions with special syntax construct like
```
#{ ctx[full.class.name].beanProperty } 
```
which will allow getting rid of global types. It will be more verbose, but enough for our needs, so I wouldn't mind limiting the functionality in this way as well

Reviewer 2: I think global should be disabled by default for sure it is asking for conflicts. If needed we could add `@EvaluatedExpressionContext(global=true)` but default should be `false`

Author: By disabling globality you mean that context will only be available in the same module for classes that are compiled together, right? I think that introduction of flag like `global = true` is not required at the moment, would prefer more restrictive way from the start, it can always be added later if necessary

Author: I've added a separate annotation `@AnnotationExpressionContext` that is used as meta annotation for extending annotation and annotation member scoped context. I think that reusing `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` for user-defined classes and annotations in separate modules might be confusing as `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` had to be treated differently when class, annotation ot annotation member were annotated with it. Feels like separate annotation will make it more clear. Also mentioned it in the docs

Consider the following example:

.User-defined evaluated expression context
[source, java]
----
import io.micronaut.context.annotation.EvaluatedExpressionContext;
import java.util.Random;

@EvaluatedExpressionContext
public class CustomEvaluationContext {

    public int generateRandom(int min, int max) {
        return new Random().nextInt(max - min) + min;
    }

}
----

Method `generateRandom(int, int)` can now be used within Evaluated Expression in the following way:

.Usage of user-defined evaluated expression context
[source, java]
----
import io.micronaut.context.annotation.Value;
import jakarta.inject.Singleton;

@Singleton
public class ContextConsumer {

    @Value("#{ #generateRandom(1, 10) }")
    public int randomField;

}
----

Note that annotating a class with `@EvaluatedExpressionContext` makes it a bean. By default, it will be treated as

> singleton, but you can specify other scope for it. At runtime, the bean will be retrieved from application context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
singleton, but you can specify an alternative scope if required. At runtime, the bean will be retrieved from application context
```

and respective method will be invoked.

> if matching method is not found within evaluation context at compilation time, the compilation will fail. Same applies
> in case of multiple suitable methods are found in evaluation context, keep that in mind if you annotate multiple classes
> with `@EvaluatedExpressionContext`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a matching method is not found within evaluation context at compilation time, the compilation will fail. A compilation error will also occur if multiple suitable methods are found in the evaluation context, keep that in mind if you annotate multiple classes
with `@EvaluatedExpressionContext`.
```
